Flask and StatsD · steinn.org I’ve written about StatsD before, but it’s time to pick up the pen again, at least in the proverbial sense (I’m typing this on a laptop-chiclet keyboard). A few months ago I joined a new company: Takumi and we’re building an iOS app married to a Python Flask-based backend. From many perspectives, a very similar tech stack as we used at QuizUp. And it’s no coincidence. One of the founders of Takumi is Jökull Sólberg, who I worked closely with at QuizUp and as far as I know had a major effect on the initial technology stack used there. Having used this technology to build a product which got a million active users in little over a week, I think it’s a fair assumption that we are comfortable with the problems and solutions presented on the backend by this choice of tech. But it’s always possible to tweak, and that’s what this blog post is about. At QuizUp, one of the lessons I learned, and I’ve openly spoken of is the importance of metrics and instrumenting code, specifically using StatsD and Datadog is my preferred service for making those metrics visible and reacting to them. We generally did this using a combination of two techniques: A fairly ingenious view decorator which took the metric name as a parameter, wrapped a Flask view and and emitted a statsd timing for the view. Instant visibility into your view latencies! I credit Jói, the CTO of QuizUp for this. He’s an amazing developer and generally one of the nicest human beings you’ll ever meet. For those views which did a lot of things, we wrote a little context manager which could do the same as the view decorator, but for any code block. This piece of code was born as our “home” endpoint (a big-fat-gimme-everything for the client home screen) started becoming slower and slower. We needed some way of monitoring which parts of the response were taking the longest to retrieve or generate. As I mentioned before, now I’m with another company and doing similar things, and as I’m wont to do, I try and improve/iterate on what I’m doing. At Takumi I started implementing a similar view decorator, meaning some potentially repetitive code like this everywhere: Basically adding a view_metric decorator around every view with a metric name which should be easily derivable from the view name or request path. First I thought “Ah, the metric name should be derived from the request endpoint name!”, but replacing @view_metric("...") with @view_metric for over a hundred different views still is quite repetitive. Thinking back I remembered having used Werkzeug’s ProfilingMiddleware back when performance tuning QuizUp, so I thought I’d explore writing my own StatsD MiddleWare for Flask.: There’s one pretty big assumption here, which is that the all dynamic parts of a URL are UUIDs. Look at def _metric_name_from_path for details, but there I basically use a regular expression to replace any UUID’s in the URL string with id. Probably a more robust approach would be to parse the request path and construct it out of safe characters found between slashes. I’ll see if there’s a smarter way if I make a proper flask plugin out of this. Update: I rewrote the metric name construction to use the Flask app’s URL map. See this post for details :-) The code above includes a couple of little extras: StatsD: a statsd wrapper I wrote to automatically add certain tags to all metrics emitted. That’s something I’ve done before, and not really related to Flask or Werkzeug, but we are using this at Takumi so I decided to include it. get_cpu_time: the middleware and the context manager both always retrieve the actual cpu time and submit that as a separate metric. This is a neat little trick I suppose most devops people will be used to, and can be very helpful to detect both wasted cpu cycles and external bottlenecks. Here’s a minimal example of how to use the middleware: To time specific blocks of your code you can import TimingStats and use it directly: We launched Takumi on the 11th of November and we’re using this code in production, and although I have a nagging suspicion I’ll discover some unpaid price for this magic, we are seeing metrics for all of our views completely automatically :-) For convenience sake if anyone wants to use this stuff, here’s a github repo: github.com/steinnes/statsdmiddleware. Later article ebenv: Elastic Beanstalk environment copy/dump tool Older article Setting up APNS for iOS